
L.aualm’s Normative Naturalism 303 

few would deny that it is a necessary condition for ascribing rationality to an agent’s 
action that he believed it would promote his ends (Laudan, 1987, p. 21, emphasis in 
original). 

It is true that ‘rationality’ is regularly used to denote instrumental efficacy. 
Still, is it clear that the last mentioned belief is a necessary condition for 
rational action? It can plausibly be thought not - or, more modestly, it can 
plausibly be thought that, even if necessary, the last mentioned belief is a 
relatively minor part of a full and adequate account of rational action. 
Consider a case in which an agent believes that her action will promote her 
ends, when she is unjustified in believing that it will: e.g., a mother’s belief that 
frequent insistence upon her son’s regular attendance at Sunday dinner will 
promote her end, namely his regular attendance, in the face of massive 
evidence that her frequent insistence has the effect of making his attendance 
less frequent. In this case the mother’s belief in the instrumental efficacy of her 
frequent insistence upon her son’s attendance is unjustified; she believes that 
her action will promote her ends, but that belief is mistaken. Is her action 
rational?’ 

A different kind of problematic case is one in which an agent justifiably 
believes that her action will further her ends, but has very good reason not to 
hold those ends. Consider a father who insists that his daughter devote herself 
to the piano, for he wants her to be a professional pianist and correctly believes 
that devoted study is necessary for a career as a pianist. In this case the father 
correctly and justifiably believes that his insistence, and his actions which 
manifest his insistence, will promote his end of raising his daughter to become 
a professional pianist. But ought he to have that end? There are plausible 
reasons for thinking that he should not. For one thing, his insistence fails to 
promote her autonomy in that it eliminates many life-options that she would 
have if she weren’t so slavishly devoted to the piano, but there are powerful 
reasons for thinking that parents should foster children’s autonomy (Siegel, 
1988). For another, there is ample psychological evidence that the life of a 
professional pianist is troubling in ways that other lifestyles are not, but 
ordinarily we think that parents should strive to enable their children to lead 
happy and satisfying, rather than frustrated, lives. In the example the father 
has not considered these challenges to his ends and defeated them; he has 
simply not thought carefully about this particular end of his. So he has an end 

‘A 

[image: image0.tif]

[image: image1.tif]Laudan’s Normative Naturalism

303


[image: image2.tif]few would deny that it is a necessary condition for ascribing rationality to an agent’s
action that he believed it would promote his ends (Laudan, 1987, p. 21, emphasis in
original).


[image: image3.tif]ON

It is true that ‘rationality’ is regularly used to denote instrumental efficacy.
Still is it clear that the last mentioned belief is a necessary condition for


[image: image4.tif]rational action? It can plausibly be thought not — or, more modestly, it can
plausibly be thought that, even if necessary, the last mentioned belief is a


[image: image5.tif]relatively minor part Of a Tull and adequate account oF rational action.
Consider a case in which an agent believes that her action will promote her
ends. when she is unjustified in believing that it will: e.g.. a mother’s belief that


[image: image6.tif]frequent insistence upon her son’s regular attendance at Sunday dinner will
promote her end, namely his regular attendance, in the face of massive

~ ~« | ~ * - 7 ~«


[image: image7.tif]evidence that ner frequent insistence nas tne emect Of making his atlendance
less frequent. In this case the mother’s belief in the instrumental efficacy of her
frequent insistence upon her son’s attendance is unjustified: she believes that


[image: image8.tif]her action will promote her ends, but that belief is mistaken. Is her action
rational?°

a. cm, — ww lw A ae . . . ere ge om ee


[image: image9.tif]A Gilerent Kind OF prooiematic Case 18 One Ih which an agent jyusunaodly
believes that her action will further her ends, but has very good reason not to
hold those ends. Consider a father who insists that his daughter devote herself


[image: image10.tif]to the piano, for he wants her to be a professional pianist and correctly believes
that devoted study i is necessary for a career as a Pianist. In this case s¢ the father |

ae qgioe “nm 4a . @ a ee gaffe q* @


[image: image11.tif]Correculy and JUSUNADIY OCHeVeS Udt Nis IMSistence, ana Ms aCulons Winch
manifest his insistence, will promote his end of raising his daughter to become
a professional pianist. But ought he to have that end? There are plausible


[image: image12.tif]reasons for thinking that he should not. For one thing, his insistence fails to
promote her autonomy in that it eliminates many life-options that she would

qq. meg il ge lly @ 2. gato. .*2 2. 2) 6M ak ww lw aT


[image: image13.tif]Dave li se Wren USO Sid VISIMYy GCVOLOU tO LIN plallO, UUL UNIO all POWOIIUE
reasons for thinking that parents should foster children’s autonomy (Siegel,
1988). For another, there is ample psychological evidence that the life of a


[image: image14.tif]professional pianist is troubling in ways that other lifestyles are not, but
ordinarily we think that parents should strive to enable their children to lead

De we em dh fr lm hk nw 4h we fw rte ted 61° CUT Cc kids ie iw 1. the Pathe


[image: image15.tif]MayPpy GUE OAUIOL YIN, PAULIN Lidl AULA, LIVNO. B11 LAI VAG LEY 1QUilhl
has not considered these challenges to his ends and defeated them; he has
simply not thought carefully about this particular end of his. So he has an end


[image: image16.tif]5A analogous scientific case might be this: a scientist has the goal of publishing only accurate


[image: image17.tif]caiculations concerning her experiments, and believes that the laborious checking and re-checking
of her calculations will be instrumentally efficacious in realizing this end. So she sets for herself the

tule, ‘always re-check calculations at least ten times before submitting work for publication’,
because she believes that following this rule will be instrumentally efficacious in achievine her end.


[image: image18.tif]if

But in fact she has never discovered an error after the second re-check. Is her re-checking a seventh
or tenth time rational?


[image: image19.tif]


