
Lauds, ‘s ‘Normative Naturalism 297 

rationality. According to that model, scientific (dis)agreement can occur at 
’ three levels: the factual/theoretical, methodological, and axiological levels. On 

the ‘hierarchical model’, which Laudan contrasts with his reticulational model, 
factual/theoretical disputes are adjudicated by appeal to methodological prin- 
ciples, and methodological disputes are adjudicated by appeal to axiology, i.e. 
to the aims or goals of science. When scientists disagree about axiology, on the 
hierarchical view such agreement cannot be rationally resolved, since there is 
nothing higher than axiology in the hierarchy to appeal to. The hierarchical 
model, coupled with other assumptions of a Kuhnian flavour, thus paves the 
way toward the conclusion that science is irrational (Laudan, 1984, chaps. 3- 
4). The reticulational model provides the avenue through which Laudan 
presents his new account of science’s rationality, according to which both 
methodological and axiological disputes can be rationally resolved by reticula- 
tion, i.e. by mutual adjustment and justification among facts/theories, method- 
ology, and axiology. 

II. Nonnative Naturalism: The Empirical Character of Methodology and 
Science’s Rationality 

On Laudan’s view, methodological rules and principles are best understood 
as hypothetical imperatives: 

Scientists presumably have the methodological rules they do because they suppose 
that following the rules in question will bring about . , . the realization of their 
cognitive or doxastic aims. So conceived, methodological rules are nothing but 
putative instrumeM.alities for the realization of one’s cognitive ends; in a word, the 
rules of science are designed simply as means to cognitive ends or tools for 
performing a task (Laudan, 1984, p. 34). 

I submit that all methodological rules should be construed not . . . as if they were 
categorical imperatives, but rather as hypothetical imperatives. Specifically, I believe 
that methodological rules, when freed from the elliptical form in which they are 
often formulated, take the form of hypothetical imperatives whose antecedent is a 
statement about aims or goals, and whose consequent is the elliptical expression of 
the mandated action. Put schematically, methodological rules of the form: 

(0) ‘One ought to do x’, 
should be understood as having the form: 

(I) ‘If one’s goal is y, then one ought to do x’. 
. . . 
Imperatives of the sort schematized by (1) above always assert a relation between 

means and ends. . . . Methodological rules are thus statements about instrumentali- 
ties, about effective means for realizing cherished ends (Laudan, 1987, p.24, 
emphasis in original. gee also Laudan, 1988, pp. 349-350). 

Construing methodological rules as ‘instrumentalities’, as hypothetical impera- 
tives relating desired ends with effective means for realizing those ends, 

[image: image0.tif]

[image: image1.tif]Laudan’'s ‘Normative Naturalism 297


[image: image2.tif]rationality. According to that model, scientific (dis)agreement can occur at
" three levels: the factual/theoretical, methodological, and axiological levels. On

aL. 62.752. LL 8 8 Ci LE EO Vi we die i Se te ewer aha best ph elt ert et LL


[image: image3.tif]LEO TILA TEI , WRU Led VUE Goto WEE Lis LULIV be LiVids Lue,
factual/theoretical disputes are adjudicated by appeal to methodological prin-
ciples, and methodological disputes are adjudicated by appeal to axiology, i.e.


[image: image4.tif]to the aims or goals of science. When scientists disagree about axiology, on the
hierarchical view such agreement cannot be rationally resolved, since there is

age a at st et eh lest me lees be ment +. S. 1’... ..t’..1


[image: image5.tif]ALUUELETD SS Abipties UII AAI Y fib LLY LUNI bY Gapped LU. 2A UII GI
model, coupled with other assumptions of a Kuhnian flavour, thus paves the
way toward the conclusion that science is irrational (Laudan, 1984, chaps. 3-


[image: image6.tif]4). The reticulational model provides the avenue through which Laudan
presents his new account of science’s rationality, according to which both

enn nth. nN nln ennl ned nwintinnwanl Arnwmestan ann tne entinanananlias wenn mivreasdd tees mmtinrwila


[image: image7.tif]AAD LAD BI CEN CANIN BRAVE! MLO PUD WOALE UY AGLI AOU Uy ARI
tion, i.e. by mutual adjustment and justification among facts/theories, method-
ology, and axiology.


[image: image8.tif]Il. Normative Naturalism: The Empirical Character of Methodology and


[image: image9.tif]Science’s Rationality

On Laudan’s view. methodological rules and principles are best understood


[image: image10.tif]as hypothetical imperatives:

Scientists presumably have the methodological rules they do because they suppose


[image: image11.tif]that following the rules in question will bring about ... the realization of their
cognitive or doxastic aims. So conceived, methodological rules are nothing but
putative instrumentalities for the realization of one’s cognitive ends; in a word, the


[image: image12.tif]rules of science are designed simply as means to cognitive ends or tools for
performing a task (Laudan, 1984, p. 34).


[image: image13.tif]1 Submit that all methodological rules should be construed not... as ui they were
categorical imperatives, but rather as hypothetical imperatives. Specifically, I believe
that methodological rules, when freed from the elliptical form in which they are


[image: image14.tif]often formulated, take the form of hypothetical imperatives whose antecedent 1s a
statement about aims or goals, and whose consequent is the elliptical expression of
the mandated action. Put schematically, methodological rules of the form:


[image: image15.tif](VU) ‘One ought to do x,
should be understood as having the form:
(1) ‘If one’s goal is y, then one ought to do x’.


[image: image16.tif]Imperatives of the sort schematized by (1) above always assert a relation between
means and ends. ... Methodological rules are thus statements about instrumentali-


[image: image17.tif]ties, about effective means for realizing cherished ends (Laudan, 1987, p. 24,
emphasis in original. See also Laudan, 1988, pp. 349-350).

LOS me ee hota wk re we en ben dd i we en mm we Biome be tc, mention ®) a hn Dah nt? 21°...


[image: image18.tif]WeMIOLE ULI BAIS LEU I Ie AUIS GO AMOLI ULC LILGILILS , ao ay pvyverwutal tpeid-
tives relating desired ends with effective means for realizing those ends,


[image: image19.tif]


