
306 Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 

reject Laudan’s instrumentalist conception of rationality, and the instrumenta- 
list conception of methodology built upon it.’ 

that all aims were on a par and that a methodology’s 
task was simply to investigate, in an axiologically-neutral fashion, which means 
promote those aims. On this analysis, the construction of a methodology of science 
is the development of a set of methodological rules, conceived as hypothetical 
imperatives, parasitic on a given set of cognitive or epistemic ends. Yet, although 
this is an attractive conception of methodology, it scarcely addresses the full range of 
epistemic concerns germane to science. I suspect that we all believe that some 
cognitive ends are preferable to others. Methodology, narrowly conceived, is in no 
position to make those judgments, since it is restricted to the study of means and 
ends. We thus need to supplement methodology with an investigation into the 
legitimate or permissible ends of inquiry. That is, a theory of scientific progress 
needs an axiology of inquiry, whose function is to certify or de-certify certain 
proposed aims as legitimate (Laudan, 1987, p. 29). 

Laudan argues that cognitive/scientific goals can be rationally evaluated; 
that ‘there is a wide array of critical tools which we can utilize for the rational 
assessment of a group of cognitive aims or goals’ (Laudan, 1984, p. 50). His 
discussion (pp. N-66) concerns two such tools: utopianism, and failure to 
accord with the values implicit in communal practices and judgments. 

A goal is utopian if proponents can offer no grounds for thinking that it can 
be achieved. One can criticize goals for utopianism in three different ways: a 
goal is demonstrably utopian if it can be demonstrated that it is unachievable 
(e.g. the goal of infallible knowledge of universal claims, given empiricist 
strictures on evidence and the impossibility of establishing universal claims by 
(finite) experience); a goal is semantically utopian if it cannot be cogently 

*The account of rationality Laudan offers is unambitious: 
. beyond demanding that our cognitive goals must reflect our best beliefs about what is and 
is not possible, that our methods must stand in appropriate relations to our goals, and that 
our implicit and explicit values must be synchronized, there is little more that the theory of 
rationality can demand (1984, p. 64). 

But the theory of rationality, understood epistemically, obviously does more. It tells us why 
certain beliefs are our ‘best’ ones; it tells us why satisfying these constraints (if Laudan is right 
about them) constitutes good reason for thinking that that which satisfies them is rational. The 
theory of rationality is the theory of evidence/good reason. It strives to say what is appropriately 
regarded as evidence/good reason. Laudan’s aazount of rationality is far more shallow than this. 

[image: image0.tif]

[image: image1.tif]306 Studies in History and Philosophy of Science


[image: image2.tif]reject Laudan’s instrumentalist conception of rationality, and the instrumenta-
list conception of methodology built upon it.


[image: image3.tif]V. Axiology and the Rational Resolution of Axiological Disputes


[image: image4.tif]Unee the instrumentaust conception of rauonanty 1s rejected, Laudan s
account of axiology and the rational resolution of controversy concerning
scientific ends is jeopardized. For Laudan’s proposals concerning the rational


[image: image5.tif]evaluation of ends depend on instrumentalism.
Laudan is insistent that an account of scientific rationality include an

not ~ ce... n 7 wan .


[image: image6.tif]account OF tne raiondl valuation OF pulauive scientime ends.

We have so far been assuming that all aims were on a par and that a methodology’s
tack wac cimnilyv ta invectigate in an avininogicallyenentral fachinn which meane


[image: image7.tif] 

eee gh ee

promote those aims. On this analysis, the construction of a methodology of science
is the development of a set of methodological rules, conceived as hypothetical

Imnerativec noeractir An a given cet af enonitive ar ermctamic ende Yat althnanaoh

OE Ag EOE

 


[image: image8.tif]eee eee ne ee eae ieee eee ne ne ee ee eee ee nn nee enn nn OI EN

this is an attractive conception of methodology, it scarcely addresses the full range of
epistemic concerns germane to science. I suspect that we all believe that some

paAcnitive ansie ara nrefeenhla tr antharc Afathandalinoy narrawly eanreivad ic innn


[image: image9.tif]ee eee ee ne nee ee I ON NO NEN DENNEN INA ED gf YOON NIE ENEMA EIS ESAI SS ISOSOS ONE EEE IEE

position to make those judgments, since it is restricted to the study of means and
ends. We thus need to supplement methodology with an investigation into the

lamtimata ar narmicahkla anda af inniuim, That ic a thane nf cmeantiG@r arnacracc


[image: image10.tif]ae tess esse we NE Sess ee we ee Ee RE Ee ei Oe
? ree

needs an axiology of inquiry, whose function is to certify or de-certify certain
proposed aims as legitimate (Laudan, 1987, p. 29).


[image: image11.tif]Laudan argues that cognitive/scientific goals can be rationally evaiuated;
that ‘there is a wide array of critical tools which we can utilize for the rational

gm i lt gt US eg t*tnosA . FCP FFIT*


[image: image12.tif]GOSOsseilt UL dad BIOUP Of LOSIUUIVE ailils Ul EUdIS (halal, 170%, PP. JU). Pils
discussion (pp. 50-66) concerns two such tools: utopianism, and failure to
accord with the values implicit in communal practices and judgments.


[image: image13.tif]A goal is utopian if proponents can offer no grounds for thinking that it can
be achieved. One can criticize goals for utopianism in three different ways: a

me te me lg Gg gb na 24 1 lt tet ee ee Ltt.


[image: image14.tif]BU 19 HEMNONOITUGOLY ULUPals th it WAIL UC AINDTEUTISLL GERAD ElIAL At to Uw Yau
(e.g. the goal of infallible knowledge of universal claims, given empiricist
strictures on evidence and the impossibility of establishing universal claims by


[image: image15.tif](finite) experience); a goal is semantically utopian if it cannot be cogently


[image: image16.tif]Ee AWN Of TabiORaiiy balldil Ulli id UNATIOIUS.
... beyond demanding that our cognitive goals must reflect our best beliefs about what is and
is not possible, that our methods must stand in appropriate relations to our goals, and that
our implicit and explicit values must be synchronized, there is little more that the theory of


[image: image17.tif]rationality can demand (1984, p. 64).
But the theory of rationality, understood epistemically, obviously does more. It tells us why
certain beliefs are our ‘best’ ones; it tells us why satisfying these constraints (if Laudan is right
about them) constitutes good reason for thinkine that that which satisfies them is rational. The


[image: image18.tif] 

theory of rationality is the theory of ‘evidence/good reason. It strives to say what is appropriately
regarded as evidence/good reason. Laudan'’s account of rationality is far more shallow than this.

ag


[image: image19.tif]


