
Laudan’s Normative Naturalism 307 

characterized (e.g. the goal of simplicity); and a goal is epistemically utopian if, 
although not utopian in the first two senses, criteria for determining whether 
the goal has been achieved cannot be specified (e.g. the goal of truth given a 
realist, non-epistemic conception of truth) (Laudan, 1984, pp. 52-53). If a 

charge of utopianism can be successfully made against some putative goal, that 
goal has been rationally criticized and is irrationally held as a goal of inquiry. 

A goal fails to accord with the values implicit in communal practices and 
judgments, or fails to reconcile theory and practice, if its espousal and 
advocacy is incompatible with actual scientific practice or judgment (e.g. the 
scientific community’s explicit goal of refraining from postulating unobserv- 
ables while utilizing in practice the so-called ‘method of hypothesis’) (Laudan, 
1984, pp. 55-59). If it can be shown that an explicitly avowed goal conflicts 
with the goals which seem implicitly to inform judgment and practice, that 
goal has been rationally criticized and is irrationally held as a goal of inquiry. 

Why are goals which are criticizable by these two strategies irrational? Why 
are these two criteria of axiological critique properly thought of as being 
epistemically or normatively forceful? Laudan justifies the first, the utopian 
strategy, in terms of a conceptual analysis of rationality: 

. . . it is at the very core of our conception of the rational and the reasonable that 
anything judged as satisfying that family of concepts must, in appropriate senses, be 
thought to be both possible and actionable. To adopt a goal with the feature that we 
can conceive of no actions that would be apt to promote it, or a goal whose 
realization we could not recognize even if we had achieved it, is surely a mark of 
unreasonableness and irrationality (Laudan, 1984, p. 51). 

Leaving the status of conceptual analysis aside,9 why should the fact that a 
goal is utopian count as a rational objection to it? Pursuing such a goal is 
irrational, for Laudan, because one would not be able to realize it, or know it 
if one had., That is, such a goal could not be instrumentally pursued. Here 
Laudan’s presupposition of an instrumentalist conception of rationality is 
evident. But as we saw earlier, instrumental reasons are not the only sort of 
reasons there are. If we take seriously Laudan’s earlier (1977) pronouncement 
on rationality, according to which rationality is a function of good reasons 
rather than instrumentality, then we see that one can pursue a utopian goal if 
one has good reasons for doing so - even if the goal is indeed utopian, so that 
one does not have a good instrumental reason for such pursuit. The point can 
be seen by applying it to Laudan’s own view. He urges us to embrace an 
instrumentalist conception of rationality. Why, on his view, should we do so? 
Not because it is instrumental for the achievement of some other goal. Rather, 
Laudan offers us arguments, by conceptual analysis, which are supposed to 

Uudan is clear that metamethodology should on his view have both naturalistic and concep 
tual components. See, e.g., Laudan (1987a), p. 231. 

[image: image0.tif]

[image: image1.tif]Laudan’s Normative Naturalism 307


[image: image2.tif]characterized (e.g. the goal of simplicity); and a goal is epistemically utopian if,
although not utopian | in the first two senses, criteria for determining whether

4 q @ og “™ «@¢ eufrF.


[image: image3.tif]tne goal has been achieved Cannot O€ Specinea (c.g. tne 2oa!l OF Truth given a
realist, non-epistemic conception of truth) (Laudan, 1984, pp. 52-53). If a
charge of utopianism can be successfully made against some putative goal. that


[image: image4.tif]goal has been rationally criticized and is irrationally held as a goal of inquiry.
A goal fails to accord with the values implicit in 1 communal practices and

mf 7 oe ¢ on


[image: image5.tif]jJuagmenis, OF taus to reconene theory and practice, Wf WS espousal and
advocacy is incompatible with actual scientific practice or judgment (e.g. the
scientific community’s explicit goal of refraining from postulating unobserv-


[image: image6.tif]ables while utilizing in practice the so-called ‘method of hypothesis’) (Laudan,
1984, pp. 55-59). If it can be shown that an explicitly avowed goal conflicts


[image: image7.tif]WN the goals Wien seem UNpPMCIuy tO MOM JUaRgMent ana pracuce, that
goal has been rationally criticized and is irrationally held as a goal of inquiry.
Why are goals which are criticizable by these two strategies irrational? Why


[image: image8.tif]are these two criteria of axiological critique properly thought of as being
epistemically or normatively forceful? Laudan justifies the first, the utopian

eam gg ee


[image: image9.tif]SUAWEY, I Willis OF d CONCODIUd: alldlysis OL rallOhallty.

... it is at the very core of our conception of the rational and the reasonable that
anvthing iundged as saticfvinge that family of concentse must in annronriate sencec he


[image: image10.tif]Ag lg Al EE EEE EE EEE EEE EEE

thought to be both possible and actionable. To adopt a goal with the feature that we

can conceive of no actions that would be apt to promote it, or a goal whose
realizatinn we conld not recognize even if we had achieved it ic cnrely a mark of


[image: image11.tif]EEE EEE ERED EEE EE gf EEE EEE RR IIE NE EI Gh EE EES

unreasonableness and irrationality (Laudan, 1984, p. 51).

Leaving the status of conceptual analysis aside? why should the fact that a


[image: image12.tif]goal is utopian count as a rational objection to it? Pursuing such a goal is
irrational, for Laudan, because one would not be able to realize it, or know it

“~m =. 9g wmpmg 2 8 2 gg qa wm 7 ogy 46s


[image: image13.tif]One Mac, ital is, suell a EOal COUIG NOL OC MStrumentaiy pursucad. ricre
Laudan’s presupposition of an instrumentalist conception of rationality is
evident. But as we saw earlier, instrumental reasons are not the only sort of


[image: image14.tif]reasons there are. If we take seriously Laudan’s earlier (1977) pronouncement
on rationality, according t to which rationality is a function of good reasons

a tt att. . .... .,.2. azn 2... wk) 2k ek lake Fk I


[image: image15.tif]PAUSE CTD MSbs Ue alaity, Led We Skt Ullal Olle Vall Purslle @ UlLOPlall BUaI il
one has good reasons for doing so — even if the goal is indeed utopian, so that
one does not have a good instrumental reason for such pursuit. The point can


[image: image16.tif]be seen by applying it to Laudan’s own view. He urges us to embrace an
instrumentalist conception of rationality. Why, on his view, should we do so?

Wine bem je sae certo cwun mtr) Li bbe culls ee mth nw ww! TR nthnxw


[image: image17.tif]SUE UV UOW 16 10 sALObs MALAI EEGs I) LEI GWLLID VRE Vl OWA VEIN evel. INGUIN,
Laudan offers us arguments, by conceptual analysis, which are supposed to


[image: image18.tif]*Laudan is clear that metamethodology should on his view have both naturalistic and concep-
tual components. See, e.g., Laudan (1987a), p. 231.


[image: image19.tif]


