
296 Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 

science banishes inquiry concerning the rationality of science because rationa- 
lity is a non-natural concept (Giere, 1985, 1988) and treats theory choice 
descriptively only. The normative dimensions of epistemology and philosophy 
of science are either ignored or actively denunciated by most contemporary 
naturalists. 

Views of naturalism which banish normative concerns face a severe self- 
reflexive difficulty: they are incapable of justifying themselves without contra- 
diction. Non-normative naturalism cannot itself be justified naturalistically; by 
its own lights, therefore, it is not justified. Putative naturalistic justifications of 
naturalism beg the question against the non-naturalist; non-naturalistic justifi- 
cations of naturalism are self-defeating (Siegel, 1980, 1984, 1989). Thus it 
appears that any viable naturalism must retain a normative dimension. 

Larry Laudan’s version of naturalized philosophy of science does retain that 
normative dimension. Laudan’s version seeks to reconcile normativity and 
naturalism; he argues that naturalized methodological rules ‘retain all the[ir] 
normative force’, but ‘they derive their warrant from empirical information 
about how this particular world is constituted. One can thus “naturalize” 
methodology . . . without being forced (with Quine) to believe that making it 
empirical and descriptive robs it of its normative force’ (Laudan, 1988, p. 350). 

In this paper I examine Laudan’s normative naturalism. My aim is to 
determine whether Laudan’s version of naturalism, which seemingly avoids the 
self-reflexive problem that undermines more standard non-normative versions 
of naturalism, can successfully avoid other difficulties which accrue to norma- 
tive naturalism. I shall argue that Laudan’s naturalism, and the conception of 
rationality which underlies it, faces difficulties which are at least as serious as 
those facing non-normative versions of naturalism. 

I. Very Brief Overview 

Laudan is a strong advocate of philosophy of science retaining a normative 
character, and his naturalism is developed against that background. ‘[PJrovid- 
ing an epistemic warrant for accepting scientific theories’, he writes, is ‘an 

unquestionably important philosophical problem’ (Laudan, 1980, p. 182).’ 
Basic to Laudan’s view is the thesis that naturalization does not preclude 
normativity: ‘. . . a denormativization of methodology is not entailed by its 
naturalization. Quite the contrary, one can show that a thoroughly ‘Scient$c” 
and robustly ‘descriptive” methodology will have normative consequences’ (Lau- 
dan, 1987, p. 25, emphasis in original). Indeed, Science and Values (Laudan, 
1984) in which Laudan introduces his normative naturalism, is devoted to the 
articulation and defence of a normative theory of the rationality of science. 
Basic to that theory is what Laudan calls the ‘reticulational model’ of scientific 

*See also Laudan (1983), pp. 321-322. 

[image: image0.tif]

[image: image1.tif]296 Studies in History and Philosophy of Science


[image: image2.tif]science banishes inquiry concerning the rationality of science because rationa-
lity is a non-natural concept (Giere, 1985, 1988), and treats theory choice

Ld nm teen tienda ewww OO ww me tbl ow en ms nt ee ed es nen A mbiil annem


[image: image3.tif]MOOV EP LEVEY VAIL. REA LIRA EAI MII VPS tee y Gl PslilViou psy
of science are either ignored or actively denunciated by most contemporary
naturalists.


[image: image4.tif]Views of naturalism which banish normative concerns face a severe self-
reflexive difficulty: they are incapable of justifying themselves without contra-

Aiatinn RAN nneeentiwa watiealawm nnnanant itealf lew frretifial wmnatiuentliiatinalths;: bu


[image: image5.tif]cnr eee oe eee ee ne EAN EE EERE E NT BURR Re JAI RE RANI LACE NES CE Lea MS

its own lights, therefore, it is not justified. Putative naturalistic justifications of
naturalism beg the question against the non-naturalist; non-naturalistic justifi-


[image: image6.tif]cations of naturalism are self-defeating (Siegel, 1980, 1984, 1989). Thus it
appears that any viable naturalism must retain a normative dimension.

Taree Tandanic varecian anf natiraliicadn nhilnacanhy af crianrea Anac ratain that


[image: image7.tif]eT ee nee ee ene oo ee eee i een ee NE NN NNO OE OES

normative dimension. Laudan’s version seeks to reconcile normativity and
naturalism; he argues that naturalized methodological rules ‘retain all thefir]


[image: image8.tif]normative force’, but ‘they derive their warrant from empirical information
about how this particular world is constituted. One can thus ‘‘naturalize”

meoethnadalnay unthanit Rhaingd frneread funth Ohnuine) tr halave that maklina it


[image: image9.tif]eee eee eee pn in ene ee ee ee ee eee ee ON ON FN ONE MOISES EIISIEEISN IAI INDO

empirical and descriptive robs it of its normative force’ (Laudan, 1988, p. 350).
In this paper I examine Laudan’s normative naturalism. My aim is to


[image: image10.tif]determine whether Laudan’s version of naturalism, which seemingly avoids the
self-reflexive problem that undermines more standard non-normative versions

AF natnrahem fran enrracefilly avaid anther Aifireiitieo which acrerne tn narma—


[image: image11.tif]cee eee ee ee eee eee een yes ee eee e ene ne pe nn nn ee ne een en eee iN NE ENN NIE

tive naturalism. I shall argue that Laudan’s naturalism, and the conception of
rationality which underlies it, faces difficulties which are at least as serious as


[image: image12.tif]those facing non-normative versions of naturalism.

Jl Verw Rrief Ovarview


[image: image13.tif]EOE gh OEE EOS IE IEE SEES

Laudan is a strong advocate of philosophy of science retaining a normative
character and hic naturalicm ic develaned acainct that hackornind ‘[Plrovid-


[image: image14.tif]en nee nn nnn nnn nn nn nnn nnn nn OO Rag EE I we EEE

ing an epistemic warrant for accepting scientific theories’, he writes, is ‘an
unquestionably important philosophical problem’ (Laudan, 1980, p. 182).


[image: image15.tif]Basic to Laudan’s view is the thesis that naturalization does not preclude
normativity: ‘... a denormativization of methodology is not entailed by its
naturalization. Quite the contrarv. one can show that a thoroughly ‘‘scientific”’


[image: image16.tif]™~

and robustly ‘descriptive’ methodology will have normative consequences’ (Lau-
dan, 1987, p. 25, emphasis in original). Indeed, Science and Values (Laudan,

aqamoar *...t*.% ¥ ... 8. 2 8 oak ew IL. ww. BY?  .  2 at 2 8 kg 2 kT 2 Yk OID ke 34. 41.


[image: image17.tif]PFO}, LM WIM LalGail HIUOUULLS TMS HORIMaGUVe Mallldlislli, lo UtyOted tO Lie
articulation and defence of a normative theory of the rationality of science.
Basic to that theory is what Laudan calls the ‘reticulational model’ of scientific


[image: image18.tif]See also Laudan (1983), pp. 321-322.


[image: image19.tif]


